Don't see others doing better than you, beat your own records everyday, because success is a fight between you and yourself.  ~Chandra Shekhar Azad
Innovation distinguishes between a leader and a follower.  ~Steve Jobs
A winner is a dreamer who never gives up.  ~Nelson Mandela
Life isn't about finding yourself. Life is about creating yourself.  ~George Bernard Shaw
Time is precious. Waste it wisely.
Dream on. Believe and make it happen. A river cuts through a rock not because of its power but because of its PERSISTENCE.  ~Jim Watkins
Make your parents proud, your enemies jealous & yourself happy.  ~The Weeknd
When you are wasting time, someone is working at the same time and the day you compete with that person, you will lose.
1.01^365= 37.8
0.99^365= 0.03
It's that 1% of extra effort every day of the year, that makes the difference.
Money is not everything in life, But make sure you earn sufficient before thinking such nonsense.  ~Forbes
Everything is Possible. Dream, Believe, Act, Achieve.
I am going to succeed. Because I am crazy enough to think I can.
Most good programmers do programming not because they expect to get paid or get adulation by the public, but because it is fun to program.  ~Linus Torvalds
Our greatest weakness lies in giving up. The most certain way to succeed is always to try just one more time.  ~Thomas A. Edison
Don't tell people your dreams, show them.
When you focus on problems, you will have more problems. When you focus on possibilities, you will have more opportunities. Dream, Wish, Make it happen.
The past is a ghost, the future a dream. All we ever have is now.  ~Bill Cosby
Success is not final, failure is not fatal: it is the courage to continue that counts.  ~Winston Churchill
Failure doesn't mean you are a failure. It just means you haven't succeeded yet.  ~Robert H. Schuller
Some people dream of success. Others stay awake to achieve it.
Everyone has the ability to make a difference in this world all you have to do is believe you have power to do so.
Few of my favorite lines in hindi:

Manzil unhi ko milti h jinke sapno mein jaan hoti h, 
Pankho se kuchh nhi hota hauslo se udaan hoti h.
Parindon ko manzil milengi yakeenan
Yeh faile hue unke par bolte hai,
Wahi log rehte hai khaamosh aksar
Zamaane mein jinke hunar bolte hai.
